Scripts used for analysis for manuscript "Histone Modification Profiles Reveal Dynamics of Polycomb And Trithorax Group Activities in Arabidopsis Embryos" (manuscript_11.05.2026.pdf)

Analysis of CUT&Tag data
Sequencing reads were quality-checked using fastQC (Version 0.12.1 [54]) and trimmed with fastp (Version 0.23.4 [55]) with options “fastp -w 4 -l 30 --trim_poly_x --poly_x_min_len 32”.  Trimmed reads were aligned to the Arabidopsis TAIR10 reference genome using Bowtie2 (Version 2.4.1 [56]) with parameters “--local --very-sensitive --no-mixed --no-discordant --phred33 -I 10 -X 700”. Reads with mapping quality (MAPQ) scoring less than 10 were filtered out using Samtools (Version 1.17 [57] ) with the option “samtools view -q 10”. Duplicate reads were marked using Picard tools (version 3.1.1, broadinstitute.github.io/picard). Sequencing depth, number of aligned reads, and number of unique reads were obtained using Samtools (samtools view -c) to evaluate alignment quality and duplication rates.

Peak Calling and Annotation
Peak calling was performed with MACS2 (Version 2.2.9.1 [58]) with options -f BAMPE --nomodel -q 0.05 --broad --broad-cutoff 0.1 -B –SPMR, total H3 samples as controls. Only nonduplicated reads were used for peak calling. To calculate the Fraction of Reads in Peaks (FRiP) score, the .bam files after duplication removal were transformed to .bed files (bedtools bamtobed), and the number of reads in peaks was obtained by intersecting the .bed files with peak files using bedtools (Version 2.31.0, [59]) [60].
Peaks detected in at least two of the three replicates were identified as consensus peaks. Consensus peaks were extracted using BEDTools (bedtools intersect) and used for subsequent analysis, except for seedling H2Aub datasets, where the peaks from the replicates with the highest nonduplicated reads were used to account for lower read counts.
Peak annotation was conducted using the flankgeneID feature of ChIPseeker (Version 1.46.1, [61]). Parameters used are: tssRegion=c(-500, 0), addFlankGeneInfo = TRUE, flankDistance = 500), such that peaks were annotated with genes located within 500 bp distances.

Visualizations
To visualize the genomic distribution of histone modifications, .bedGraph files were generated by MACS2 during peak calling with the “-B --SPMR” flag. The .bedGraph files were then background-corrected by their corresponding total H3 controls using MACS2 (MACS2 bdgcmp), converted to .bw files using bedGraphToBigWig (version 445, [62] ) with the FE (Fold Enrichment) option, and visualized with the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV, version 2.19.7 [63]). 
To visualize the distribution of histone marks along gene bodies, genomic heatmaps were generated using deepTools computeMatrix (scale-regions) and plotHeatmap (Version 3.5.3, [64]).
To assess sample similarity, background-corrected bigwig files were analyzed with deepTools (multiBigwigSummary) using either 500-bp genomic bins (--binSize 500) or peak areas (--BED). The options used are provided in the figure legends. The differences between samples and controls were analyzed using the sequencing-depth-normalized bigwig file generated by deepTools (bamcoverage) (Figure S1).
Overlap of gene sets was visualized using the R package VennDiagram (Version 1.8.2, [65], R version: 4.5.2). Overlap of peaks was first calculated using the R package GenomicRanges (Version 1.62.1, [66], R version: 4.5.2) and visualized using VennDiagram.

Analysis of RNA-seq data
Public RNA sequencing data from Arabidopsis seedlings and embryos were downloaded from the European Nucleotide Archive (accession numbers: ERR10163199, ERR10163200 [40]) and NCBI Sequence Read Archive (accession numbers: SRR8054371, SRR8054372, SRR8054373, SRR8054377, SRR8054378, SRR8054379 [39]; SRR2500947, SRR1931614 [7]). Reads were quality-checked using fastqc (0.12.1, [54]) and trimmed with fastp (version 0.23.4, -w 16 -l 30 --trim_poly_x --poly_x_min_len 32, [55]).
Kallisto (version 0.48.0, [67]) was used to pseudo-align the trimmed reads to the reference transcriptome. Transcripts per million (TPM) numbers obtained from Kallisto output were read and normalized using Sleuth (version 0.30.1, [68]) to obtain normalized transcriptome data.
Gene expression levels were visualized using box plots and heat plots made with the R package ggplot2 (version 4.0.1, [69], R version: 4.5.2). Jittered data points were added to boxplots using ggbeeswarm (version 0.7.3, [70], R version: 4.5.2). For comparing expression levels of genes marked by different histone modifications, statistical comparisons were performed using Wilcoxon rank sum test from the R package ggpubr (version 0.6.2, stat_compare_means(method = "wilcox.test", paired = FALSE), [71], R version: 4.5.2).

Differential Enrichment Analysis
Differential enrichment analysis of histone modifications was performed with the R package DiffBind (Version 3.20.0, [72], R version: 4.5.2, method=DBA_DESEQ2), which implements DESeq2 (Version 1.50.2, [73]) for normalization and differential testing. Identified differential enriched regions were subsequently annotated using the flankgeneID feature of ChIPseeker (Version 1.46.1, [61], tssRegion=c(-500, 0), addFlankGeneInfo = TRUE, flankDistance = 500). Comparisons were visualized using XY scatter plots generated with ggplot2. 

Gene Ontology Enrichment Analysis
Gene Ontology (GO) Enrichment Analysis was performed using the R package clusterProfiler (Version: 4.18.4, [74], R Version: 4.5.2, pAdjustMethod = "BH", qvalueCutoff = 0.05) and annotation database org.At.tair.db (Version 3.22.0, [75] ). For gene sets identified by differential analysis, the background universe for GO enrichment tests was defined as all genes associated with the histone modification of interest in at least one developmental stage.

Motif Enrichment Analysis
Motif enrichment analysis was performed by MEME Suite (Version 5.4.1, [76]). BED files containing consensus peaks were converted to FASTA sequences using the bed2fasta function. Motifs enrichment was tested using meme-chip (-order 2 -minw 6 -maxw 15 -meme-nmotifs 10 -meme-searchsize 100000 -streme-pvt 0.05 -streme-align) and JASPAR 2022 Core Plant non-redundant database [77]. Motifs that were repetitive or did not match any known transcription factors were excluded from the results.
